Introduction

 

The headline for a recent article in Forbes magazine reads, “What’s

the next big thing in big data?” then answers by saying, “Bigger data.” The

author goes on to write that this is still the early days for Big Data. In 2013

only five percent of the potential digital data in this country was analyzed,

even though 22% of digital information is a candidate for analysis. Several

different consulting firms concur with some variation of the label that, “Big

Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, Competition, and Productivity. “

Bernard Marr has enumerated ten examples of using Big Data that run the

gamut from improving healthcare to decreasing urban traffic problems.

Patrick Tucker looked at the long-term future for Big Data and wrote that,

“In the next two decades, we will be able to predict huge areas of the future

with far greater accuracy than ever before in human history, including events

long thought to be beyond the realm of human inference.” It seems clear

that Big Data has become the latest buzz word in the world of technology,

but beyond all the rhetoric, what is Big Data and why is it important?

 

How Is Big Data Defined?

 

The name Big Data (sometimes called business analytics) clearly

implies that size is important, and this is only one of the defining

characteristics of the problem. Most computer users are accustomed to

thinking of data in terms of megabytes and gigabytes, but Big Data requires

much larger units. Data is stored in a computer in binary locations that can

have one of two possible values, one or zero, and a single one of these

locations is called a Bit. The basic unit of digital storage is a byte, which is

usually thought of as consisting of eight bits. A Megabyte is normally

defined to be 1,000,000 bytes, although computer makers sometimes define

it as being the number two raised to the twentieth power. This gives a value

slightly different from the one million bytes, but the difference is small and

for the purposes of this discussion the more common definition of a

megabyte as one million bytes will be used. By the same convention, a

Gigabyte is 1000 Megabytes. At one time this was considered to be a large

amount of computer memory, but now it is possible to buy a one Gigabyte

flash drive for only a few dollars.

David Weinberger points out that according to researchers at the UC-

San Diego, Americans consumed about 3.6 Zettabytes of information in

2008. Weinberger offers a vivid analogy to visualize the size of this much

data. He points out that War and Peace is about 1296 pages in print, which

would be equivalent to 2 megabytes in digital format. This means that one

Zettabyte equals 5x10^14 (that is, 5 with fourteen zeroes after it.) copies of

War and Peace. If each physical book is six inches thiсk, it would take a

photon of light traveling at 186,000 miles per second 2.9 days to go from the

top to the bottom of a stack of this book equivalent to one Zettabyte. This is,

indeed, an unimaginable amount of data, but there is already discussion of

the need for even larger data measures, like Yottabytes (1000 Zettabyes) and

even Brontobytes (1000 Yottabytes). A Brontobyte would be 1 with 27

zeroes after it or 1 x 10^27 bytes.

Although the amount of data is one obvious aspect of Big Data, there

are other factors that may require the use of Big Data tools for analysis.

IBM summarizes the characteristics of Big Data by saying that there are

three V’s. The sheer volume of stored data is exploding; IBM predicts that

there will be 35 Zettabytes stored by 2020. This data comes in a

bewildering variety of structured and unstructured formats. And the velocity

of data depends on not just the speed at which the data is flowing but also

the pace at which it must be collected, analyzed, and retrieved.

Beyond these three V’s, Big data is also about how complicated the

computing problem is. The cost of a personal genome is dropping rapidly

and some are predicting a $100 dollar cost soon. Knowing an individual’s

genome should allow medical treatment to be customized to the individual.

Forrester principal analyst Mike Gualtieri points out that the data from one

individual's sequenced DNA is only about 750MB, but it would require 222

Petabytes for storage for the entire population of the U.S. Even if the goal

was just to analyze the genome for one person in order to find disease

indicators, the complexity of the interactions among this data set would

represent a massive computing problem that would require Big Data tools.

Thus, in addition to the three V’s identified by IBM, it would also be

necessary to take complexity into account.

Several factors have contributed to the current interest in Big Data:

Computer memory has become much cheaper and easier to search.

The cost per gigabyte of data storage provided by a USB flash drive

has fallen from more than $8,000 when they were first introduced

about ten years ago, to 94 cents today.

Social networks collect what formally had been ephemeral

conversations. Twitter generates more than 7 Terabytes (TB) a day;

Facebook more than 10 TBs, and some enterprises already store data

in the petabyte range. As business has become more globalized, coordinating what is

happening at multiple locations has become more complicated but

also, more important. Big Data tools can help with this problem.

One key factor that may explain much of the current hype is the

expectation that Big Data analysis will allow more accurate identification of

customer characteristics than traditional marketing methods. An apocryphal

quote attributed to John Wanamaker (the founder of the eponymous

department store) as early as 1919 says, “I know that half of my advertising

doesn’t work. The problem is I don’t know which half.” The persistence of

this quote suggests a basic truth about many businesses in this country.

Although most businesses collect terabytes of information about customers,

employees, and their enterprise, it is a common complaint that leaders can’t

access their information fast enough, and even when it is accessed it doesn’t

give leaders what they need to know. It is hoped that Big Data will allow

companies to understand better what consumers are thinking. This could

result in more focused business analytics will improve the ability to predict

what the consumer wants and how to reach her. Many businesses, like Amazon and Netflix, use correlation analysis to

suggest products that might interest current customers, that is, suggesting

possible purchases based on the similar purchase by other customers. It is

critical to remember that correlation does not almost imply causation. Just

because one buys a book about World War I doesn’t necessarily mean that

you also want to buy a book about World War II even though many people

may be buying books in both categories. Even more important, when

correlation does the results may be counterproductive. One of the most

famous misuses of this practice was when Target sent coupons for baby

products to a teenage female customer who was predicted to be pregnant

because she was buying unscented lotion, mineral supplements, and cotton

balls. The result was more negative than had been envisioned by Target,

since the analysis was accurate, but the young lady had not yet shared the

news with her father. Ellenberg uses the problem at Target as a starting point for a much

broader discussion of how computer algorithms can be used to predict

human activities. He argues that human behavior is not like problems in

Newtonian physics, where the answer can be quite precise if enough

information is available, but rather people behave more like the weather,

where chaos always makes the results somewhat unpredictable. He goes on to ask who is

responsible if a computer algorithm makes a mistake in

identifying people who are likely to not pay their debts, or be involved in

terrorism.

 

Big Data Tools

 

One of the simplest (and cheapest) ways to use Big Data is to track the

number of people who are searching a given term each day by using a tool

like Google’s Big Query. This is a free service that allows a user to query

terabytes of data in seconds using a Structured Query Language (SQL)

interface. (SQL is a special-purpose programming language designed for

managing data held in a relational database management system.) These

results can be extremely powerful, as demonstrated by the fact that by

tracking the search term “flu symptoms” this technique was able to detect

regional outbreaks of the flu a week to 10 days before they are reported by

the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

In the age of social networking, public opinion is as likely to be

shaped by popular bloggers or those with many followers on Twitter as it is

by traditional experts who write for newspapers or magazines. People who

have the power to shape the opinions and decisions of others because of their

knowledge, relationship, or authority are called influencers. Marketers wish

to identify the influencers in order to communicate with them and change

their minds; social scientists view them as early indicators of future public

opinion.

One of the simplest tools used to identify influencers is a free service

called Klout which measures the size and engagement of a user’s social

media network based on their activity on Twitter, Facebook, Google+,

LinkedIn, Foursquare, and Instagram data to arrive at a social influence or

Klout score. These scores measure the overall influence of a user and range

between 1 and 100, with 40 being the average. The disadvantage is that

Klout does not allow you to isolate those who have influence around a

specific topic. Marketers and social scientists wish to search for influencers

who rank the highest for a specific topic or product can accomplish this

using tools like Little Bird, Inkybee, or Cyfe.

Moving to a more sophisticated level of analysis requires the use of

the data-processing tools that have been developed to handle the rapid

growth in size of the World Wide Web. Search engines, like Yahoo and Google, were the

first companies to work with datasets that were too large

for conventional methods. In order to power its searches, Google developed

a search strategy called MapReduce. The software distributes a task onto a

multitude of processors which process the input. Traditional data

warehouses use a relational database (like Excel rows and columns);

Search engines need to handle non-relational databases, sometimes called

NoSQL. The most popular software to handle No-SQL databases is called

Hadoop, and several different versions are available as freeware. Hadoop is

designed to collect data even if it doesn’t fit nicely into tables, distribute a

query across a large number of separate processors, and then combine the

results into a single answer in order to deliver results in almost real time.

Hadoop jobs have traditionally been written in Java, but recently interfaces

are begin developed that make the process easier less-experienced operators.

 

Big Data and Higher Education

 

Big data is attracting attention among educators for several reasons.

In an era when many students attend college with the hopes that this

experience will lead to a job after graduation, there are various predictions

that there will be a rosy future for graduates who have understand how to

use Big Data. In a recent report entitled, “Big Data: The Next Frontier for

Innovation, Competition, and Productivity”, McKinsey & Company, a

global management consulting firm, predicts that Big Data will become a

key basis of competition and growth for individual firms. They predict that

by 2018 the United States could face a shortage of 140,000 to 190,000

people with deep analytical skills as well as 1.5 million managers and

analysts who can use big data. Not to be outdone, Gartner, a leading

information technology research and advisory company, says that 4.4 million

IT jobs will be created by 2015 to support Big Data. Even if these

estimates are optimistic, it would appear that in the near future there will be

a significant demand for people who have these skills. Colleges and

universities have an opportunity as well as an obligation to give their

students the skills needed to compete for these jobs.

Big Data analytics is also playing an ever-increasing role in science

research. As sensors become cheaper and smaller, more scientific

experiments depend on collecting so much data that it can only be analyzed

by Big Data techniques. For example, the Square Kilometer Array (SKA)

under development in Australia and South Africa will consist of 36

small antennas spread over more than 3000 km to simulate a single giant

be transferred from its servers every second.

Sverre Jarp, Chief Technology Officer at CERN, says, "We are able to get

results out as soon as we have the data. This is what big data analysis is all

about, extracting the value from data immediately. We have open source

tools; anyone can use them, which help us find the nuggets in the tsunami of

data we face.”

Big Data is also causing a revolution in research in the social sciences.

King points out that since 1995 there has been an onslaught of new and more

informative social science data produced by the revolution in computer

technology, the transformation of many records from analog to digital

format, and the competition among governments to share data. He

contends that new types of research data about human behavior and society

are being made possible by the availability of a wealth of information that

previously had to be gathered manually. He also reminds his colleagues that

there is a need for better ways to share data and protect privacy than so-

called anonymous surveys, since in many cases it is relatively easy to

identify the participants. King contends that social scientists need to form

alliances with archivists and the legal community to find better ways to

share and store data. It is imperative that social scientists begin asking

critical questions about what all this data means, who gets access to it, how

it is deployed, and to what ends.

 

Future Uses of Big Data

 

Several factors make it likely that the current rate of data

accumulation will continue, if not accelerate, in the future. As

microprocessors and sensors have become smaller and cheaper, they are

being incorporated into many common devices, such as appliances, cars, and

even light bulbs. According to a recent Pew Report, a major contributor to

Big Data will be The Internet of Things (IoT), where, “A global, immersive,

invisible, ambient networked computing environment built through the

continued proliferation of smart sensors, cameras, software, databases, and

massive data centers in a world-spanning information fabric known as the

Internet of Things.” The Internet of Things is the network of physical

objects that contain embedded technology to communicate and sense or

interact with their internal states or the external environment. Gartner

predicts that the Internet of Things, excluding PCs, tablets and smartphones,

will consist of 26 billion units by 2020, an almost 30-fold increase from 0.9

billion in 2009. The Internet of Things will soon produce a massive

volume and variety of data at unprecedented velocity.

It is the hope that the Internet of Things will eventually include

continual information access and personalized content to everyone wherever

and whenever he or she wishes. This goal is called ambient intelligence,

where a network of low-power, light-weight, and low-cost devices create an

environment that anticipates an individual’s needs and wirelessly creates

personalized responses. Ambient intelligence will create a different type of

Big Data problem, where it is necessary to sort through a wealth of data that

is being supplied, take appropriate action where it can be automated, and

prioritize the need for response where a personal action is required.

Another potential source of large amounts of data is Unmanned Aerial

Vehicles (UAVs), commonly called drones. The public has become aware of

the military uses for drones which can stay aloft for days at a time and can

include powerful sensors that collect large amounts of data or even carry

weapons. According to an article by Ackerman, the U.S. Air Force is

planning to create improved software tools that can integrate the video feeds

from drones with imagery obtained from satellites, piloted spy planes and

other sources. In addition, the U.S. Navy is developing its own set of

drones that will perform underwater in ways that are similar to what the Air

Force drones do in the sky. A big difference is that the navy drones will be

self-powered and draw energy from the ocean’s thermocline, a pair of layers

of warm water near the surface and chillier water below. This will allow

them to move underwater for very long periods of time and be almost

undetectable.

Use of drones by private parties and companies in the U.S. has been

slowed by the failure to develop regulations about allowed uses, but despite

this there is already considerable interest in using drones for public services

and private information gathering. There is already a new generation of

smaller and cheaper models that are becoming available for civilian

applications. The kind of information drones can collect will be very

valuable to corporate and commercial interests that deal with video and

imagery. As the legal status of drones becomes clearer, their use is expected

to expand rapidly. Matt Mikell, from Dell, predicts that, “drones will change

the way businesses spend advertising dollars, survey land, harvest crops,

speed traffic, reduce mining waste and protect more with less. The potential

applications are endless and when matched with data from phones, cars,

trucks, planes, trains and machinery, could lead to information evolution and

a new industrial revolution.” All these applications will require Big Data

tools.

The medical profession’s continuing shift to Electronic Health Record

(HER) systems represents another area that will require Big Data techniques

to become truly effective. EHRs may include a range of data on individual

patient histories, including personal statistics, medical history, medication

records, allergies, test results, immunization status, etc. as well as summary

data that provides information about demographic groups. The American

Medical Association (AMA) estimated that developing this capability along

with improved medical records could save as much as $450 million in health

care costs, but Big Data techniques would be necessary since the AMA says

that current electronic health record systems lack the sophistication to

manage the storage and retrieval of this much information.

 

Concluding Thoughts

 

Big Data is already a part of our lives. Even though Big Data sounds

like an esoteric topic only of interest to specialists, most people already use

it every day when they do a Google search, plan a trip on Expedia, buy a

book from Amazon, or ask their broker about a potential stock purchase.

Because these actions are so transparent to the user (and often are free), it is

easy to forget that Big Data tools are working in the background. Even less

visible, but equally important, are cases where companies or governments

are scrutinizing day-to-day operations to identify potential customers,

terrorists, possible criminals, or just people with influence. The better that

everyone recognizes this intrusion and works to understand the operations of

the wizard behind the curtain, the more chance there will be to truly

maintain control of our lives.

In conclusion, it is important to remember that Big Data may also have a

positive impact. Danah Boyd, a Principal Researcher at Microsoft Research,

observed that data is becoming like the air we breathe; it can be a source of

both pollution and sustenance. She outlined several important questions

that must be dealt with before Big Data reaches its full potential. Despite

these concerns, she concludes that the application of Big Data tools will

create a fundamental change in the way knowledge is created. Ultimately,

the value of Big Data comes from the valuable patterns of knowledge that

can be derived by making connections between pieces of data about an

individual, among groups of individuals, or simply about the structure of

information itself.